Budget Allocation/ Human Capital Formation:

If you really want to know the priorities of a government, instead of going to their manifesto, check their budget allocation. One major reason our literacy rates have remained low or extremely stagnant is that there is very little allocation in the Budget. 


Too Many Stakeholders:

The system has too many stakeholders – teachers, students, administrators and even the Government. While the main focus in on the ones who education is being dispensed to, the children, even the imparters, that is the teachers, aren’t happy with a lot of instability in regulations, unwarranted discipline imposed on them. And, in that bid to please all the stakeholders, and failing at it, the essence of education and literacy is lost. It’s the age-old saying of “Too many cooks spoil the broth”.

The System Is Outdated:

We need better policies, more interactive classroom approach, more student-friendly learning methodology, and better study models which would focus on holistic and comprehensive learning, instead of the flawed and narrow ‘let’s cram and vomit in exam’ models.


How Can It Get Better?:

Education Start-Ups: The statistics clearly show how important it is for our literacy rates to get better. Many online education start-ups are working for the literacy rates to soar. They focus on building interest in the formative years and, hence, target the younger age groups.

Follow the Delhi Model: The Delhi government’s model on budget allocation for education is a solid example of prioritising right. Their programme ‘Mission Buniyaad’ was aimed to beat the poor literacy rate. Today, students are at a level playing field thanks to their exemplary programmes which have also got world recognition. Today, the Delhi Chief Minister’s son and a tailor’s son are going to be studying together at IIT. It’s not about the class divide, but providing equal access to resources- that’s the main ‘end’ a government must seek to achieve through the ‘means’ of these policies.



